00-prerequisites/anypoint-cli-installation.md, before:

# Anypoint CLI Installation for CI/CD Pipelines

## Abstract

This informal document discusses installing the Anypoint Platform Command-Line Interface (CLI), or simply the Anypoint CLI.

## Purpose

This document complements MuleSoft's documentation, not replacing it. It provides additional documentation and examples to help you get started quickly.

## Overview

Before installing the Anypoint CLI, ensure your environment meets the following system prerequisites:

| Requirement | Recommended / Tested Version | Notes |
|--------------|---------------------|-------|
| **Node.js** | 18.x – 22.x (LTS) - see note below. | Officially supported: 18–20. Tested successfully with 22.20.0. |
| **npm** | 9.x or later | Tested with version 11.6.2. |
| **Operating System** | macOS, Linux, or Windows | Choose the appropriate installation method for your OS. |

As discussed in the article [Installing Anypoint CLI 4.x](https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install), you must first install `Node.js` and `npm` before installing the Anypoint CLI. As implied in this article, the suggested approach is to follow the instructions provided on the [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) web page. This web page lets you to chose the `Node.js` version, target operating system, installation method, and package manager, and it tailors the installation instructions accordingly. Optionally, you can download a prebuilt installation package specific to your target operating system. 

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-01-download-node-js.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

> [!NOTE]
>
> While the [official documentation](https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install) specifies `Node.js` versions 18.0.0 to 20.0.0, all examples in this repository have been authored and successfully tested with `Node.js` 22.20.0 LTS and `npm` 11.6.2. This indicates that newer LTS versions of Node.js may also work in practice, even if they are not explicitly listed as supported.
>
> Upgrade `npm`  to the latest stable version using the instructions provided in the article [Try the latest stable version of npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/try-the-latest-stable-version-of-npm).

Install the Anypoint CLI core package using the following command:

```text
npm install -g anypoint-cli-v4
```

As a smoke test, run the following command to verify that the installation completed successfully and to display the CLI version:

```text
anypoint-cli-v4 version
```

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-02-anypoint-cli-version.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

By default, no plugins are installed with the Anypoint CLI core package. To follow the principle of least privilege, install only the **API Manager** and **Exchange** plugins with the command below:

```text
anypoint-cli-v4 plugins:install anypoint-cli-api-mgr-plugin anypoint-cli-exchange-plugin
```

To verify that the plugins installed successfully, run:
```text
anypoint-cli-v4 plugins
```

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-03-anypoint-cli-plugins.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

## Where This Fits in the Lifecycle

This document covers **installation prerequisites** for working with the Anypoint Platform Command Line Interface (CLI). Installing the Anypoint CLI is a foundational step that must be completed before any lifecycle stage that relies on CLI-based automation, including:

- Authenticating to the Anypoint Platform.
- Publishing assets to Anypoint Exchange.
- Registering APIs in Anypoint API Manager.
- Deploying APIs to Anypoint Flex Gateway.
- Applying policies and promoting APIs across environments.

Once the CLI is installed, the next step is to configure authentication for automated, non-interactive usage:

- [00-prerequisites/anypoint-cli-authentication.md](./anypoint-cli-authentication.md)

For a high-level view of the full automation lifecycle and how these stages relate to one another, see:

- [01-lifecycle-overview/README.md](../01-lifecycle-overview/README.md)

Commit message:

docs: align abstract, purpose, and narrative flow across root, prerequisite, and lifecycle documentation

00-prerequisites/anypoint-cli-installation.md, after:

# Anypoint CLI Installation for CI/CD Pipelines

## Abstract

This informal document discusses installing the Anypoint Platform Command-Line Interface (Anypoint CLI).

## Purpose

The purpose of this document is to complement MuleSoft’s official documentation, not to replace it. It provides practical guidance for installing the Anypoint CLI. It clarifies system prerequisites, highlights tested versions, and outlines a minimal Anypoint CLI plugin installation to automate the API management lifecycle for Flex Gateway.

## Overview

Before installing the Anypoint CLI, ensure your environment meets the following system prerequisites:

| Requirement | Recommended / Tested Version | Notes |
|--------------|---------------------|-------|
| **Node.js** | 18.x – 22.x (LTS) - *see note below*. | Officially supported: 18–20. Tested successfully with 22.20.0. |
| **npm** | 9.x or later | Tested with version 11.6.2. |
| **Operating System** | macOS, Linux, or Windows | Choose the appropriate installation method for your OS. |

As discussed in the article [Installing Anypoint CLI 4.x](https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install), you must first install `Node.js` and `npm` before installing the Anypoint CLI. As implied in this article, the suggested approach is to follow the instructions provided on the [Download Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) web page. This web page lets you to chose the `Node.js` version, target operating system, installation method, and package manager, and it tailors the installation instructions accordingly. Optionally, you can download a prebuilt installation package specific to your target operating system. 

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-01-download-node-js.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

> [!NOTE]
>
> While the [official documentation](https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install) specifies `Node.js` versions 18.0.0 to 20.0.0, all examples in this repository have been authored and successfully tested with `Node.js` 22.20.0 LTS and `npm` 11.6.2. This indicates that newer LTS versions of Node.js may also work in practice, even if they are not explicitly listed as supported.
>
> Upgrade `npm`  to the latest stable version using the instructions provided in the article [Try the latest stable version of npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/try-the-latest-stable-version-of-npm).

Install the Anypoint CLI core package using the following command:

```text
npm install -g anypoint-cli-v4
```

As a smoke test, run the following command to verify that the installation completed successfully and to display the CLI version:

```text
anypoint-cli-v4 version
```

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-02-anypoint-cli-version.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

By default, no plugins are installed with the Anypoint CLI core package. To follow the principle of least privilege, install only the **API Manager** and **Exchange** plugins with the command below:

```text
anypoint-cli-v4 plugins:install anypoint-cli-api-mgr-plugin anypoint-cli-exchange-plugin
```

To verify that the plugins installed successfully, run:
```text
anypoint-cli-v4 plugins
```

<img src="../assets/images/cli-install-2-1-03-anypoint-cli-plugins.png" style="width:80%;max-width:750px;"/>

## Where This Fits in the Lifecycle

This document covers installing the Anypoint CLI, required to automate API management. You must install the Anypoint CLI and configure your authentication method before running any CLI commands that interact with the Anypoint Platform, including:

- Publishing versioned APIs to Anypoint Exchange.
- Registering APIs in Anypoint API Manager.
- Deploying APIs to Anypoint Flex Gateway.
- Applying policies programmatically.
- Promoting APIs across environments.

Read [00-prerequisites/anypoint-cli-authentication](./anypoint-cli-authentication.md) for an overview of the three authentication approaches when using the Anypoint CLI.

Review [01-lifecycle-overview/README](file:///Users/abelisle/Documents/GitHub/Mule-Docs/anypoint-flex-apim-automation/01-lifecycle-overview/README.md) for a concise explanation of the API management automation lifecycle and how these stages relate to one another.

# Additional Resources

- Download Node.js - https://nodejs.org/en/download/
- Latest stable version of npm - https://docs.npmjs.com/try-the-latest-stable-version-of-npm
- Install Anypoint CLI 4.x - https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install
- Anypoint CLI List of Plugins - https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/install#plugin-list
- Anypoint CLI 4.x List of Commands - https://docs.mulesoft.com/anypoint-cli/latest/anypoint-platform-cli-commands
